.. include:: ../../references.txt

.. _pig-020:

*************************
PIG 20 - Global Model API
*************************

* Author: Axel Donath, Régis Terrier and Quentin Remy
* Created: Jun 10, 2020
* Accepted:
* Status:
* Discussion:

Abstract
========
Gammapy already supports joint-likelihood analyses, where indiviudal, statistically
independent datasets are represented by a `Dataset` object. In a typical analysis
scenario there are components in the model, that are only fitted to one of the datasets,
while other model components are shared between all datasets. This PIG proposes the
introduction of a global model API for Gammapy, which handles all model components
involved in an analysis in a single global models object to resolve the spreaded
model definition in the current implementation. We consider the global model API
as a key solution for future support for distributed computing in Gammapy.


Proposal
========

Global Model Handling
---------------------
Currently different model components are handled in Gammapy by having a different
selection of models in the ``Dataset.models`` attributes and pointing to the same
instance of a model, if the component is shared between multiple datasets. This
works as long as all objects reside in the same memory space.

If datasets are distributed to different processes in future, it is technically
complex and probably in-efficient to share model states between all sub-processes.
It is conceptionally simpler if processes communicate with a single server process
that contains the single global model object.

The fundamental important difference to the current design is, that the model objects
defined in ``Dataset.models`` can represent copies of the global model object components.

To handle this difference in the API we propose to define two different models classes.
The global ``Models`` abstraction and a ``DatasetModels`` class, which represents a
(possibly copied sub-set) of the global model, with the model components only applied
to a specific dataset. The ``DatasetModels`` object will be immutable, so methods
like ``.append()``, ``.insert()`` etc. are not supported.

User will only interact with the ``Models`` class, the ``DatasetModels`` class
remains mostly an implementation detail.

.. code::

	from gammapy.modeling.models import Models
	from gammapy.datasets import Datasets

	models = Models.read("my-models.yaml")
	datasets = Datasets.read("my-datasets.yaml")

	# the .set_models call distributes the model components
	datasets.set_models(models)

	# and to update parameters during fitting, a manual parameter modification by the user
	# requires an update as well.
	datasets.set_models_parameters(models.parameters)

Using the ``.set_models()`` API we propose to hide the ``dataset.models`` attribute.
It also requires adapting our fitting API as well to handle the model separately:

.. code::

	from gammapy.modeling import Fit

	fit = Fit(datasets)

	result = fit.optimize(models)

	# or for estimators

	fpe = FluxPointsEstimator(
		source="my_source"
	)

	fpe.run(datasets, models)


Alternatively we can make the ``Models`` object available on the ``Datasets``
object as well:

.. code::

	from gammapy.modeling.models import Models
	from gammapy.modeling import Fit
	from gammapy.datasets import Datasets

	models = Models.read("my-models.yaml")
	datasets = Datasets.read("my-datasets.yaml")

	# models can be set like so
	datasets.models = models

	# this results in the model components being distributed and (possibly copied) to the
	# dataset objects contained in the datasets object

	# or are created on datasets init

	datasets = Datasets([dataset_1, dataset_2])

	print(datasets.models)

	# if the models object is modified

	models.append(model)

	# the models need to be reset like so
	datasets.models = models


The public model attribute allows to create a global model on data reduction like so:

.. code::

	models = Models()

	for obs in observations:
		dataset = bkg_maker.run(dataset)
		dataset.write(f"dataset-{obs.obs_id}.fits.gz")
		models.extend(dataset.models)

	models.write("my-model.yaml")


But allows to modify parameters values without effect on the global model:

.. code::

	datasets[0].models["my-model"].spectral_model.amplitude.value = 1e-8


To further prevent usage errors we propose to remove the sub-model component setters on `SkyModel`.


Interaction Between Models and Dataset Objects
----------------------------------------------

The ``MapDataset`` object features methods such as ``.to_spectrum_dataset()``, ``.to_image()``
and ``.stack()`` and ``.copy()``. It is convenient for the user if those methods modify the
models contained in the dataset as well. In particular this is useful for the background model.
We propose a uniform scheme on how the dataset methods interact with the model.

We propose that in general datasets can modify their own models i.e. copies contained
in 	``DatasetModels``, but never interact "bottom to top" with the global ``Models``
object. So the global model object needs to be re-defined or updated explicitly.

The proposed behaviour is as follows:
- ``Dataset.copy()``, copy the dataset and model, if a new name is specified for the dataset, the
``Model.dataset_names`` are adapted.

- ``Dataset.stack()``, stack the model components by concatenating the model lists. The background model
is stacked in place.

- ``.to_image()`` sums up the background model component and ``TemplateSpatialModel`` if it defines
an energy axis.

- ``.to_spectrum_dataset``, creates a fixed ``BackgroundModel`` by summing up the data in the same region.
Further suggestions? Check which model contributes npred to the region?


Background Model Handling
-------------------------

We propose to

We also propose to extend the ``BackgroundModel`` to include a spectral model
component like so:

.. code::

	from gammapy.modeling.models import BackgroundIRFModel, PowerLawNormSpectralModel

	norm = PowerLawNormSpectralModel(norm=1, tilt=0.1)

	bkg_model = BackgroundIRFModel(
		spectral_model=norm,
		dataset_name="my-dataset"
	)

	bkg_model.evaluate(map=map)

After introduction of the global model we propose to remove ``MapDataset.background_model``
and use ``MapDataset.models["dataset-name-bkg"]`` instead. Introduce a naming convention?

The background data can be stored either in the ``BackgroundModel`` class
or the ``MapDataset`` object as an IRF. This has implications on the
serialisation and memory management once we introduce distributed
computing. In one case the data is stored in the server process
in the other case it is stored on the sub-process.

To support spectral background models we propose to support ``RegionGeom`` in
the ``BackgroundModel`` class.



Spectral Norm Models
--------------------

For the purpose of adjusting template based models we propose to introduce a new
class of spectral models. Those spectral models feature a norm parameter instead
of amplitude and are named using the `NormSpectralModel` suffix:

.. code::

	from gammapy.modeling.models import PowerLawNormSpectralModel, LogParabolaNormSpectralModel, NodeNormSpectralModel

	pwl_norm = PowerLawNormSpectralModel()
	log_parabola_norm = LogParabolaNormSpectralModel()
	bpwl_norm = PiecewiseBrokenPowerlawNormSpectralModel()
	const_norm = ConstantNormSpectralModel()


**Alternatives:** Technically the following works as well:

.. code::

	from gammapy.modeling.models import PowerLawSpectralModel, Parameter

	amplitude = Parameter(name="amplitude", value=1, unit="")

	pwl_norm = PowerLawSpectralModel(amplitude=amplitude)


This avoids code duplication, but features possibly a slightly less cleaner API.
The introduction of ``NormSpectralModel`` classes allows to use slightly more
explicit parameter names, such as ``norm`` and ``tilt`` (including better
default values) and to hide methods such as ``.energy_flux()``, which are
less meaningful for spectral models, where amplitude represent a norm.


Energy Dependent Spatial Models
-------------------------------
A very common use-case in scientific analyses is to look for energy dependent
morphology of extended sources. In the past this kind of analysis has been typically
done by splitting the data into energy bands and doing individual fits of the
morphology in these energy bands. In a combined spectral and spatial ("cube") analysis
this can be naturally achieved by allowing for an energy dependent spatial model,
where the energy dependence is e.g. described by a parametric model expression with
energy dependent parameters.

In the current model scheme we use a "factorised" representation of the source model,
where the spatial, energy and time dependence are independent model components and
not correlated:

.. math::

	f(l, b, E, t) = A \cdot F(l, b) \cdot G(E) \cdot H(t)

To represent energy dependent morphology we propose to introduce energy
dependent spatial models:

.. math::

	f(l, b, E, t) = A \cdot F(l, b, E) \cdot G(E) \cdot H(t)

In general the energy dependence is optional. If the spatial model does not declare
an energy dependence it assumes the same morphology for all energies. This also ensures backwards
compatibility with the current behaviour.

To limit the implementation effort in this PIG we propose to only adapt the ``SkyDiffuseCube``
and add an example energy dependent custom model to our documentation. We do not propose to
introduce general dependence of arbitrary model parameters for any spatial model, such as
``GaussianSpatialModel`` or ``DiskSpatialModel``. An example of how this can be achieved with
a custom implemented model is given below.

We propose to add energy dependence to the ``TemplateSpatialModel`` and
replace the current ``SkyDiffuseCube``by:


.. code::

	spatial_model = TemplateSpatialModel.read("my_cube.fits")

	model = SkyModel(
		spatial_model=spatial_model,
		spectral_model=PowerLawNormSpectralModel()
	)

A custom energy dependent spatial model can be implemented like:


.. code::

	from gammapy.modeling.models import SpatialModel
	from astropy.coordinates.angle_utilities import angular_separation

	class MyCustomGaussianModel(SpatialModel):
		"""My custom gaussian model.

		Parameters
		----------
		lon_0, lat_0 : `~astropy.coordinates.Angle`
			Center position
		sigma_1TeV : `~astropy.coordinates.Angle`
			Width of the Gaussian at 1 TeV
		sigma_10TeV : `~astropy.coordinates.Angle`
			Width of the Gaussian at 10 TeV

		"""
		tag = "MyCustomGaussianModel"
		lon_0 = Parameter("lon_0", "0 deg")
		lat_0 = Parameter("lat_0", "0 deg", min=-90, max=90)

		sigma_1TeV = Parameter("sigma_1TeV", "1 deg", min=0)
		sigma_10TeV = Parameter("sigma_10TeV", "0.5 deg", min=0)

	@staticmethod:
	def evaluate(lon, lat, energy, lon_0, lat_0, sigma_1TeV, sigma_10TeV):
		"""Evaluate custom Gaussian model"""
		sigmas = u.Quantity([sigma_1TeV, sigma_10TeV])
		energy_nodes = [1, 10] * u.TeV
		sigma = np.interp(energy, energy_nodes, sigmas)

		sep = angular_separation(lon, lat, lon_0, lat_0)

		exponent = -0.5 * (sep / sigma) ** 2
		norm = 1 / (2 * np.pi * sigma ** 2)
		return norm * np.exp(exponent)

	@property
	def evaluation_radius(self):
		"""Evaluation radius (`~astropy.coordinates.Angle`)."""
		return 5 * self.sigma_1TeV.quantity


Spectral Absorption Model
-------------------------

In the current handling of absorbed spectral models we have a very special
``Absorption`` model, which is not a spectral model. To resolve this special
case, we propose to refactor the existing code and handle the absorbed case
using a ``CompoundSpectralModel``. The new implementation is used as follows:

.. code::

	from gammapy.modeling.models import EBLAbsorptionSpectralModel, PowerLawSpectralModel

	absorption = EBLAbsorptionSpectralModel.from_reference(
		redshift=0.1, alpha_norm=1, reference="dominguez"
	)

	pwl = PowerLawSpectralModel()

	spectral_model = absorption * pwl

	assert isinstance(spectral_model, CompoundSpectralModel)

In addition we propose to rename `.table_model` to `.to_template()`.


XML Support for Reading Models
------------------------------
ctools as well as the Fermi Science Tools use a XML-based model serialisation
format. To ensure compatibility with these tools we propose to add
support for reading XML files to Gammapy, so that the following works:

.. code::

	from gammapy.modeling.models import Models

	models = Models.read("my_model.xml")
	print(models)


**Alternatives:** Alternatively one could implement a conversion script, that
allows to convert a model file from YAML to XML format. This script would be
shipped with Gammapy and be available as a sub-command ``gammapy convert-model-file my_model.xml my_model.yaml``.
The effort of implementation is comparable.

For complete support it is necessary to add further models to Gammapy,
which are listed in the following section.


Additional Models
-----------------
In addition we propose to implement the following models in ``gammapy.modeling.models``:


- ``SersicSpatialModel`` following the parametrisation of the Astropy ``Sersic2D`` model.

- ``BrokenPowerLaw`` with the following parametrisation:

.. math::

	\begin{split}phi(E) = phi_0 \times \left \{
\begin{eqnarray}
  \left( \frac{E}{E_b} \right)^{\gamma_1} & {\rm if\,\,} E < E_b \\
  \left( \frac{E}{E_b} \right)^{\gamma_2} & {\rm otherwise}
\end{eqnarray}
\right .\end{split}



- ``PiecewiseBrokenPowerLawSpectralModel``

.. code::

	energy = [1, 10, 100] * u.TeV
	amplitudes = [1e-12, 1e-13, 1e-15] * u.Unit("TeV-1 cm-2 s-1")

	model = PiecewiseBrokenPowerLawSpectralModel(
		energy=energy, amplitudes=amplitudes
	)


	print(model.amplitude_0)
	print(model.amplitude_1)


To be discussed:
- ``CompositeSpatialModel``, that represents the sum of multiple spatial
model components. This will be useful for "multi-component" sources (e.g. HGPS
analysis), but requires a definition of attributes such as `.position`.
ctools implements such a model

- ``CompositeSpectralModel``, the same as above but for multiple spectral
components.


- Reintroduce ``PhaseCurveModel``, not for fitting of phases, but to get mean fluxes over time?


Introduce Shorter YAML Alias Tags
---------------------------------

We propose to introduce shorter YAML tags for all models in Gammapy, to simplify
definition of the models in YAML. For backwards compatibility we propose to support
the class name as well.

Here is a list of proposed YAML tags:

======================================== ======================
Class Name                               YAML Tag
======================================== ======================
ConstantSpectralModel                    spectral-const
CompoundSpectralModel                    spectral-compound
PowerLawSpectralModel                    pl
PowerLaw2SpectralModel                   pl-2
SmoothBrokenPowerLawSpectralModel        sbpl
BrokenPowerLawSpectralModel				 bpl
PiecewiseBrokenPowerLawSpectraModel      pwbpl
ExpCutoffPowerLawSpectralModel           ecpl
ExpCutoffPowerLaw3FGLSpectralModel       ecpl-3fgl
SuperExpCutoffPowerLaw3FGLSpectralModel  secpl-3fgl
SuperExpCutoffPowerLaw4FGLSpectralModel  secpl-4fgl
LogParabolaSpectralModel                 logpar
TemplateSpectralModel                    spectral-template
GaussianSpectralModel                    spectral-gauss
EBLAbsorbtionSpectralModel               ebl-absorbtion
NaimaSpectralModel                       naima
ScaleSpectralModel                       scale
======================================== ========================
ConstantSpatialModel                     spatial-const
TemplateSpatialModel                     spatial-template
GaussianSpatialModel                     spatial-gauss
DiskSpatialModel    					 disk
PointSpatialModel						 point
ShellSpatialModel                        shell
SersicSpatialModel						 sersic
======================================== ========================
ConstantTemporalModel          			 temporal-const
LightCurveTemplateTemporalModel          temporal-template
GaussianTemporalModel					 temporal-gauss
ExpDecayTemporalModel					 exp-decay
======================================== ========================


Once the YAML tags are introduce the following simple creation via the `Model.create()`
factory method works:

.. code::

	from gammapy.modeling.models import Model

	pwl = Model.create(tag="pwl", **pars)


To further simplify the structure of the YAML file, the default values should be removed on write:

Instead of:

.. code::

	spectral:
		type: PowerLawSpectralModel
		parameters:
		- {name: index, value: 2.0, unit: '', min: .nan, max: .nan, frozen: false,
            error: 0}
		- {name: amplitude, value: 1.0e-12, unit: cm-2 s-1 TeV-1, min: .nan, max: .nan,
            frozen: false, error: 0}
		- {name: reference, value: 1.0, unit: TeV, min: .nan, max: .nan, frozen: true,
            error: 0}

We should try to simplify to:

.. code::

	spectral:
		type: pwl
		parameters:
			index:
				value: 2
			amplitude:
				value: 1e-12 cm-2 s-1 TeV-1
			reference:
				value: 1 TeV
				frozen: true


Decision
========


.. _gammapy: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy
.. _gammapy-web: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-webpage

