.. include:: ../../references.txt

.. _pig-029:

*************************************************************
PIG 29 - Separation of Plotting Methods using Plotter classes
*************************************************************

* Author: Régis Terrier and Atreyee Sinha
* Created: ``2025-03-14``
* Accepted:
* Status:
* Discussion: `#5726`_

Abstract
========

This PIG proposes to separate plotting methods from Gammapy objects by introducing
dedicated `Plotter` classes (e.g., `MapDatasetPlotter`). This would improve code maintainability,
enhance flexibility for users, and optimize efficiency by avoiding unnecessary imports of `matplotlib`.
This could also facilitate testing beyond the simple execution of the plotting methods.

Motivation
==========

Currently, plotting methods are tightly integrated with Gammapy objects. This presents several issues:

- **Code Complexity**: Plotting code can be a large fraction of the code of a given class (see e.g. `Background2D`) .
  Plot functions are often large and complex, making files harder to read and maintain. In particular, they need to forward
  numerous arguments to lower level plot functions or to matplotlib functions. This results in complex kwargs dictionary
  arguments which is difficult to document and error prone.
- **Lack of Extensibility**: Users cannot easily extend plotting functionalities without modifying core Gammapy objects.
  For instance, Datasets built from different experiment might require different `peek()` methods. See for instance `#5570`_.
  It should not be necessary to create a new `Dataset` object to support this. Configuration or subclassing should be
  possible.
- **Performance Overhead**: We initially always used delayed imports for matplotlib but removed this at some point.
  Yet always importing `matplotlib` is inefficient for workflows that do not need plotting functionalities.

A more modular approach, using dedicated `Plotter` classes, would resolve these issues while preserving all current plotting functionalities.
We already have an example of such a class in `gammapy.visualization`, the `MapPanelPlotter`. It is a `WcsNDMap` plotter
that plots galactic survey maps in a multi-panel figure. It can be configured on init and it will call the `WcsNDMap.plot`
function. This class is not directly connected to an object but rather to a type of plot.

Note that SunPy `ndcube` implements as a similar approach `MatplotlibPlotter`_

Proposed Changes
================

- Introduce separate `Plotter` classes for different Gammapy objects (e.g., `MapDatasetPlotter`, `SpectrumDatasetPlotter`).
  - A `Plotter` should be stateless. It would define, global plot configuration on init and take the object to plot as
    argument of the plot methods it provides. Configuration validation could be performed on init.
  - The `Plotter` should be an attribute of the parent object.
  - It could be lazily instantiated to import matplotlib only when needed.
  - Existing plot methods will silently call the `self.plotter` to ensure backward compatibility
- Move existing plotting methods from core objects to these new `Plotter` classes. Move corresponding tests as well.
  - Existing plotting functionalities will remain accessible but may be deprecated in future releases.


Implementation
==============

- Utilize the existing `gammapy.visualization` module to host `Plotter` classes.
- Define `Plotter` classes for key Gammapy objects and move plotting-related code there.
- Each `Plotter` class should take a minimal configuration on init, possibly the matplotlib rcParams.
- At a minimum, a `Plotter` class should implement all plotting-related methods currently existing for its associated object.

The base `Plotter` class could be structured this way:

.. code:: python

  import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
  from matplotlib import RcParams, rcParams

  class BasePlotter:
      def __init__(self, rc_params=None):
        """Init plotter object with dict of matplotlib rcParam keys.
            Validation is performed using matplotlib internal mechanism.
        """
        # Store a `~matplotlib.RcParams` object to ensure validation of each key.
        # Make a local copy to avoid changing global parameters
        self._rcParams = RcParams(rcParams.copy())

        if rc_params:
            self.rcParams = rc_params

    @property
    def rcParams(self):
        """Return local `~matplotlib.RcParams` configuration."""
        return self._rcParams

    @rcParams.setter
    def rcParams(self, rc_params):
        """Set and validate local `~matplotlib.RcParams` configuration."""
        if not isinstance(rc_params, dict):
            raise ValueError("rc_params must be a dictionary.")

        for k, v in rc_params.items():
            self._rcParams[k] = v

The parameters used are then copied and local to the `Plotter` object and we can rely on matplotlib's validation scheme
to make sure they are correct. The `plot` functions would then call into matplotlib functions using the context manager
`with plt.rc_context(self.rcParams)`.

This approach would allow to configure the plot aspect early.

The `WcsNDMapPlotter` could then be defined this way:

.. code:: python

  class WcsMapPlotter(BasePlotter):
      def __init__(self, rc_params=None):
          super().__init__()
          self.rcParams["image.interpolation"]="nearest"
          self.rcParams["image.origin"]="lower"
          self.rcParams["image.cmap"]="afmhot"
          self.rcParams = rc_params

Configuration of the `WCSAxes` could also be added on init.

The `MapDatasetPlotter` could look like this:

.. code:: python

  import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

  class MapDatasetPlotter:
    """"""
    def __init__(self, rc_params=None):
        super().__init__(rc_params)

    def peek(self, dataset, figsize=(12, 8)):
        """Quick-look summary plots.

        Parameters
        ----------
        dataset : `~gammapy.datasets.MapDataset`
            The MapDataset to peek in.
        figsize : tuple
            Size of the figure. Default is (12, 10).

        """

        def plot_mask(ax, mask, **kwargs):
            if mask is not None:
                mask.plot_mask(ax=ax, **kwargs)

        with plt.rc_context(self.rcParams):
            fig, axes = plt.subplots(
                ncols=2,
                nrows=2,
                subplot_kw={"projection": self._geom.wcs},
                figsize=figsize,
                gridspec_kw={"hspace": 0.25, "wspace": 0.1},
            )

            axes = axes.flat
            axes[0].set_title("Counts")
            dataset.counts.sum_over_axes().plot(ax=axes[0], add_cbar=True)
            plot_mask(ax=axes[0], mask=dataset.mask_fit_image, alpha=0.2)
            plot_mask(ax=axes[0], mask=dataset.mask_safe_image, hatches=["///"], colors="w")

            axes[1].set_title("Excess counts")
            dataset.excess.sum_over_axes().plot(ax=axes[1], add_cbar=True)
            plot_mask(ax=axes[1], mask=dataset.mask_fit_image, alpha=0.2)
            plot_mask(ax=axes[1], mask=dataset.mask_safe_image, hatches=["///"], colors="w")

            axes[2].set_title("Exposure")
            dataset.exposure.sum_over_axes().plot(ax=axes[2], add_cbar=True)
            plot_mask(ax=axes[2], mask=dataset.mask_safe_image, hatches=["///"], colors="w")

            axes[3].set_title("Background")
            dataset.background.sum_over_axes().plot(ax=axes[3], add_cbar=True)
            plot_mask(ax=axes[3], mask=dataset.mask_fit_image, alpha=0.2)
            plot_mask(ax=axes[3], mask=dataset.mask_safe_image, hatches=["///"], colors="w")

    def plot_mask(self,):
        pass

In the `MapDataset` code one would have:

.. code:: python

        def __init__(self, **lots_of_arguments):
            self._plotter = None  # Lazy instantiation

        @property
        def plotter(self):
            """Access the plotter for this MapDataset.

            See `MapDatasetPlotter` for available plotting methods.
            """
            if self._plotter is None:
                from .plotters import MapDatasetPlotter   # delayed import

                self._plotter = MapDatasetPlotter(self)
            return self._plotter

        def peek(self, figsize=(12, 8)):
            self.plotter.peek(figsize)

An example for `gammapy.data` objects is proposed in the PR `#5725`_.

The property getter/setter mechanism could use a `PlotMixin` approach to avoid repeating the boilerplate code.

If a user wants to modify `MapDataset.peek()` to provide more suited visualization of e.g. Fermi data (`#5570`_), they could
create a class inheriting from `MapDatasetPlotter` and overload its `peek` method. Similarly, different plotting
backends could be supported.

Alternatives
============

A general drawback of this approach is the large number of plotter classes necessary. Yet given the specialization of plot functions this seems
unavoidable.

Other strategies can be envisioned:
- Keep the current approach: This would maintain the status quo but does not address the issues outlined.
- Use mixin classes: This could modularize the code but still tightly couples plotting with core objects.
  We have this already with `PlotMixin` that is used by `SpectrumDataset`. But this does not allow to have you own plotters
  nor to have delayed imports.
- Define standalone plotting functions instead of classes: This would reduce complexity but may lead to less structured and reusable code
  and probably less maintainable.


Decision
========

The PIG is open for discussion

.. _#5570: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/issues/5570
.. _#5725: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/issues/5725
.. _#5726: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/issues/5726
.. _(see e.g. MatplotlibPlotter): https://docs.sunpy.org/projects/ndcube/en/stable/api/ndcube.visualization.mpl_plotter.MatplotlibPlotter.html


