.. include:: ../../references.txt

.. _pig-014:

*******************************
PIG 14 - Uncertainty estimation
*******************************

* Author: Christoph Deil, Axel Donath, Quentin Rémy, Fabio Acero
* Created: June 20, 2019
* Accepted: Nov 19, 2019
* Status: accepted
* Discussion: `GH 2255`_

Abstract
========

Currently Gammapy uses the `uncertainties`_ package to do error propagation for
differential and integral flux of spectral models, e.g. to compute spectral
model error bands. This is cumbersome since ``uncertainties`` doesn't support
``astropy.units.Quantity`` (which we currently use in spectral model
evaluation), and doesn't work at all for some spectral models (e.g. EBL
absorption and Naima), since ``uncertainties`` uses autodiff and needs explicit
support for any Numpy, Scipy, Astropy, ... function involved.

We propose to replace this with a custom uncertainty propagation implementation
using finite differences. This will be less precise and slower than
``uncertainties``, but it will work for any derived quantity and code that we
call, and any spectral model.

We also propose to add support for a second method to propagate uncertainty from
fit parameters to derived quantities, based on parameter samples. This is the
standard technique in MCMC Bayesian analyses, but it can be used as well for
normal likelihood analyses.

Introduction
============

In Gammapy, ``gammapy.modeling`` and specifically the ``gammapy.modeling.Fit``
class support likelihood fitting to determine best-fit parameters, and to obtain
a covariance matrix that represents parameter uncertainties and correlations.
Parameter standard errors are obtained as the square root of the elements on the
diagonal of the covariance matrix (see e.g. `The interpretation of errors`_).
Asymmetric errors and confidence intervals can be obtained via likelihood
profile shape analysis, using methods on the ``gammapy.modeling.Fit`` class,
partially re-implementing, partially calling the methods available in Minuit or
Sherpa (see e.g. `Fitting and Estimating Parameter Confidence Limits with
Sherpa`_).

However, often one is interested not directly in a model parameter, but instead
in a derived quantity that depends on multiple model parameters. Typical
examples are that users want to compute errors or confidence intervals on
quantities like differential or integral flux at or above certain energies, or
location or extension of sources, from spectral and spatial model fits.

Here we will discuss two standard techniques to compute such uncertaintes:

1. Differentials (see `Wikipedia - Propagation of uncertainty`_ or `uncertainties`_)
2. Monte carlo (MC) samples (see `mcerp`_ or `astropy.uncertainty`_)

If you're not familiar with the techniques, here's a few references:

- `Error estimation in astronomy - A guide`_
- `Frequentism and Bayesianism - A Python-driven Primer`_

In Gammapy we currently use the `uncertainties`_ package to propagate errors to
differential fluxes ``spectral_model.evaluate_error`` and integral fluxes
``spectral_model.integral_error``. The ``evaluate_error`` method is called for
an array of energies in ``plot_error``, which is used to compute and plot
spectral model error bands (see e.g. the `SED fitting tutorial`_) It is using
autodiff to compute differentials of derived quantities wrt. model parameters,
which is accurate and fast where it works. However, ``uncertainties`` doesn't
support ``astropy.units.Quantity``, making the current spectral model flux
evaluation very convoluted, and it doesn't work at all for some spectral models,
namely non-analytical models like EBL absoption or Naima cosmic ray spectral
models, which has been a frequent complaint by users (see `GH 1046`_, `GH
2007`_, `GH 2190`_).

The MC sample method is most commonly used for Bayesian analysis, where the
model fit directly results in a sample set that represents the parameter
posterior probability distribution. A prototype example for that kind of
analysis has been implemented in the `MCMC Gammapy tutorial`_ notebook. However,
the MC sample error propagation technique can be applied in classical
frequentist statistical analysis as well, if one considers it a numerical
technique to avoid having to compute differentials, and instead samples a
multivariate normal according to the best-fit parameters and covariance matrix,
and then propagates the samples. One can scale the covariance matrix to only
sample near the best-fit parameters and thus should be able to reproduce the
differential method (within sampling noise).

Proposal
========

We propose to change the ``SpectralModel.evaluate_error`` implementation to a
custom differential based error propagation, as shown in the  `Gammapy
uncertainty propagation prototype notebook`_. This allows us to completely
remove the use of `uncertainties`_ within Gammapy, and to simplify the spectral
model evaluation code. This will be a bit slower and less accurate than the
current method, but it is a "black box" technique that will work for any
spectral method or code that we call.

In the future we think that using an autodiff solution could be useful, not just
for error propagation, but also for likelihood optimisation. It's unlikely that
we'd use `uncertainties`_ though, rather we'd probably use `autograd`_ or `jax`_
or even Tensorflow or PyTorch or Chainer or some other modern array computing
package that supports autograd. So we think removing ``uncertainties`` now and
cleaning up or model evaluation code is a good step, even if we want to change
to some other framework later.

We also propose to add a method to generate parameter samples from the best-fit
parameters and covariance, and to support MC error propagation. See  `Gammapy
uncertainty propagation prototype notebook`_. This second part could be done
before or after the v1.0 release, it's independent of the first proposed change.
The first step would be to add a test and improve the code of MC sampling
interface (see `GH 2304`_). Then probably we should add a ``Distribution``
object from `astropy.uncertainty`_ to ``Parameter`` or to a new ``FitMC`` class
to store samples from MC analysis, or multinormal samples from the covariance
matrix. And then possibly support for such objects in model evaluation and
derived quantities. Another option could be to add support for "model sets" as
in ``astropy.modeling`` to support arrays of parameter values within one model
object, or to directly change ``gammapy.modeling`` to be based on
``astropy.modeling``. As you can see, this second part of the proposal is a wish
that Gammapy support MC sample based error propagation, the implementation is
something to be prototyped and worked out in the future (could be now and for
v1.0, or any time later).

Alternatives
============

- Support only sample-based uncertainty propagation (like e.g. PyMC or 3ML)
- Support only differential uncertainty propagation (like e.g. Minuit)
- Keep everything as-is, use `uncertainties`_
- Change to another autograd package like ``autograd`` or ``jax``

Decision
========

This proposal was discussed extensively on GitHub (`GH 2255`_), and also
in-person at the Gammapy coding sprint in Nov 2019. The exact mechanism and
implementation for uncertainty propagation needs to be worked out (see the
prototype notebook), this will happen at the coding sprint later this week.
There were no objections to this proposal received, so it's accepted.

.. _The interpretation of errors: http://lmu.web.psi.ch/docu/manuals/software_manuals/minuit2/mnerror.pdf
.. _Fitting and Estimating Parameter Confidence Limits with Sherpa: https://proceedings.scipy.org/articles/Majora-ebaa42b7-001
.. _Wikipedia - Propagation of uncertainty: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Propagation_of_uncertainty
.. _Frequentism and Bayesianism - A Python-driven Primer: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1411.5018.pdf
.. _Error estimation in astronomy - A guide: https://arxiv.org/pdf/1009.2755.pdf

.. _Gammapy uncertainty propagation prototype notebook: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy-extra/blob/master/experiments/uncertainty_estimation_prototype.ipynb
.. _joint_crab fit_errorbands.py: https://github.com/open-gamma-ray-astro/joint-crab/blob/master/joint_crab/fit_errorbands.py
.. _joint_crab results: https://nbviewer.jupyter.org/github/open-gamma-ray-astro/joint-crab/blob/master/2_results.ipynb
.. _gammapy.utils.fitting.Parameters: https://docs.gammapy.org/0.12/api/gammapy.utils.fitting.Parameters.html
.. _MultiNorm: https://multinorm.readthedocs.io
.. _scipy.stats.multivariate_normal: https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy-1.3.0/reference/generated/scipy.stats.multivariate_normal.html
.. _MCMC Gammapy tutorial: https://docs.gammapy.org/0.12/notebooks/mcmc_sampling.html
.. _mcerp: https://pypi.org/project/mcerp/
.. _astropy.uncertainty: https://docs.astropy.org/en/stable/uncertainty/index.html
.. _autograd: https://github.com/HIPS/autograd
.. _jax: https://github.com/google/jax
.. _SED fitting tutorial: https://docs.gammapy.org/0.14/notebooks/sed_fitting_gammacat_fermi.html

.. _GH 1046: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/issues/1046
.. _GH 1971: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/pull/1971
.. _GH 2007: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/issues/2007
.. _GH 2190: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/issues/2190
.. _GH 2218: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/issues/2218
.. _GH 2255: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/pull/2255
.. _GH 2304: https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/pull/2304
