. include:: ../../references.txt

.. _pig-023:

****************************************************
PIG 23 - Gammapy release cycle and version numbering
****************************************************

* Author: Régis Terrier, Axel Donath and ?
* Created: May 12th, 2022
* Accepted:
* Status:
* Discussion:

Abstract
========

This PIG proposes the general plan for timing of releases and their version numbers to start
with the release v1.0. Following the approach of astropy (ref APE 2), versions numbered
vX.0 are designated "long-term support" (LTS) and are released on typical timescales
of two years. New features releases have a shorter cycle of about 6 months and are numbered
X.Y (with Y>0). Bugfix releases are applied on both the current feature release and the LTS
releases when needed. The development procedure to implement this scheme is detailed.




Current status
==============

Until v0.20, Gammapy releases have mostly been new feature releases in order to
build complete set of functionalities with a stable API for the v1.0 release.
This approach and release cycles were described in the roadmap for
v1.0 PIG :ref:`pig-005`. Releases cycles have varied between every two months and
once a year. The six-month timescale has been found to most practical both for users
and developpers.

Version 1.0 is the first one that requires "long-term-support" (LTS) to allow
for users and facilities relying on Gammapy not to always upgrade to the
latest version while still having the guarantee that major bugs will be
corrected. Implementing this requires to precisely define the numbering scheme
and to specify the associated development plan in terms of calendar, workflow
(development branches), deprecation and backward compatibility. A first discussion
on this took place during January 2022 co-Corking week (link?).

Release scheduling and LTS
==========================

%%%% Adapter
Releases between feature releases will only contain bugfixes, not new
features. (See the "Releases and backwards compatibility" section below for more
on what is considered a bug fix).

Additionally, some feature releases will be designated "long-term support" (LTS)
releases, and these will continue to receive bugfixes for at least two years
(i.e., typically 3 regular feature releases will follow an LTS release).  This
addresses the first issue by applying a time-based release cycle, meaning no
feature will need to wait more than six months before reaching users.
Simultaneously, it addresses the second concern by providing a guarantee to
facilities that if they use an LTS, they can count on releases fixing critical
bugs for at least two years.  Finally, the LTS releases also act as a convenient
time to submit new Astropy journal papers.
%%%%%

Version numbering
=================

Gammapy will follow the astropy version scheme i.e. of the form ``x.y.z``, with typically::

* 1.0.0 (LTS release)
* 1.0.1 (bug fix release)
* 1.0.2
* 1.1.0 (six months after 1.0.0)
* 1.1.1 (bug fix release on the feature branch)
* 1.0.3 (bug fix release on the LTS)
* 1.1.2
* 1.2.0 (six months after 1.1.0)
* 1.2.1
* 1.3.0 (six months after 1.2.0)
* 1.0.4 (bug fix release on the LTS)
* 1.3.1 (bug fix release on the feature branch)
* 2.0.0 (LTS release, six months after 1.3.0)

Feature freeze/testing calendar
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Because bug checking/fixing and preparation for release take time, a feature
freeze will need to be enacted *before* the time of a given feature release.
Such a feature freeze will mean no more major new feature pull requests will be
accepted for that version, but minor improvements, bug fixes, or documentation
additions are still acceptable.  The standard calendar for a release will be:

* -6 months: previous release
* -1 month: feature freeze, beta release, branch created
* -1 week: release candidate

This is not meant to be an exactly strict calendar, as the day of the week,
existence of holidays, and degree of readiness of key features or critical bug
fixes necessitate slop in the exact timing.  So more what you'd call guidelines
than actual rules.

Rapid Feature Releases
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This plan is not meant to exclude the possibility of releases *more* frequent
than every six months.  Six months should be considered both the maximum and the
default timeline, but a *shorter* time between releases is allowable, if the
community agrees it is worthwhile. When/if this happens, the subsequent LTS
release should be timed such that is at least two years after the last LTS, even
though that may mean there are more than 3 releases between the LTSs.

For example, if a new feature is perceived by the Astropy developer community as
being of great importance, and is completed only three months after the v1.0
release, a v1.1 release could occur at that time.  Once that release has
completed, the release clock is "reset", so v1.2 would be released six months
after v1.1, even though it is not yet 12 months after v1.0. The next two
releases would then be v1.3 and v1.4, because v1.4 would only be 21 months after
v1.0. v2.0 would then either come three months or six months later, depending on
how much work is planned to be new in v2.0.

Releases and backwards compatibility
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As defined here, a "bugfix release" must not break backwards compatibility as
defined by the public API, and it also should not introduce new major features.
The exception to this is cases where the API has an actual mistake that needs to
be fixed, such as a function argument that is missing but was clearly intended
to be there. Further, a bugfix release *can* include documentation improvements,
and in the future there may be some sort of "sandbox" package to act as a
preview or testbed for new additions to come in the next feature release.

Feature releases do *not* guarantee backwards compatibility with previous
releases.  However, all backwards incompatible changes should always be
mentioned in the release notes for a new version.  Furthermore, when possible, a
backwards incompatible change should generate an `AstropyDeprecationWarning` for
at least one feature release version before actually making the change
permanent, to allow codes to transition to the new interface. A future APE may
add to or change this with a more concrete policy on when and for how long
something should be deprecated.


Branches and pull requests
--------------------------

N/A


Implementation
--------------

If this APE is accepted, a few organizational steps will be required:

* The currently under-development version "v0.4" will be the first following
  the release cycle.  Because v0.3 was released On the last Monday in Nov 2013,
  the feature freeze and beta for v0.4 will be scheduled for the last Monday in
  April 2014, With a release at the end of May 2014.  The milestone on GitHub
  will thus need to be updated to match this.
* The first LTS release (v1.0) will then come six months after v0.4, so an
  appropriate milestone will need to be added to GitHub.  Following that,
  milestones should be added as needed to reflect the versioning scheme
  described in this APE.
* The documentation should be updated to mention the existence of LTS releases
  and make it clear that they come with a promise of two years of bug fixes (as
  needed). It should also add a link to this APE so that those interested in the
  numbering scheme can look here for details.


Backward compatibility
----------------------

N/A


Alternatives
------------

An alternative version numbering scheme mentioned on astropy-dev was to continue
the current scheme of ``0.x.y``, and simply append `-LTS` for LTS releases. The
disadvantage of this approach is that the first version number is then rendered
essentially meaningless.  That is, given its nature as a research library, it is
unlikely to ever be "feature-complete", and hence there is no clear break point
for a 1.0 version.  The scheme proposed here simply assigns a different meaning
to the major version as "number of LTSs since the start of the project".

Another alternative is to use `semantic versioning <http://semver.org/>`_. The
disadvantage of that approach for Astropy is that it is very likely that *all*
versions in the foreseeable future will break backwards compatibility to some
extent.  In semantic versioning, this would mean all versions would need to be
of the form ``x.0.y``, rendering the minor version number meaningless.


Decision rationale
------------------

There was a fair amount of discussion on  `the GitHub PR
<https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/pull/2>`_, but mainly specific details,
rather than objections to the general scheme.  The largest change from the
original proposal was the addition of the idea that *less than* six month
releases were acceptable. The above content reflects those suggestions, and the
APE was accepted 12/10/13, as there were no significant objections from the
community.