.. include:: ../../references.txt

.. _pig-005:

***************************
PIG 5 - Gammapy 1.0 Roadmap
***************************

* Author: Axel Donath (editor), Régis Terrier & Christoph Deil
* Created: September 28, 2018
* Accepted: January 31, 2019
* Status: accepted
* Discussion: `GH 1841`_

Abstract
========

This PIG describes the required short- and medium-term **development work up to
the Gammapy 1.0** release. The anticipated time scale for this development effort
is **9 - 12 months** and will be concluded by the Gammapy 1.0 release in fall 2019.
The question of **API design and sub-module structure for Gammapy 1.0 will be
addressed in separate PIGs**.

The content of this document was decided based upon user feedback from the first
CTA data challenge (DC1), experience from analysing existing datasets as well as
definition of use cases (see below). The content will be **updated in the
comming month** and be adjusted to upcoming **requirements defined by CTA**.
Current requirements defined by CTA are described observer access use cases
(private link to slides_) and in the document written summarizing the SUSS
workshop Dec. 2018 (private link to indico_).

Releases
========

Starting in fall 2018, we will create stable releases **every 2 months**.

We plan to release Gammapy 1.0 in November 2019, and to add a Gammapy 0.15
release in October 2019, to support increased user testing and feedback before
releasing 1.0.

Our definition of Gammapy 1.0 is that Gammapy supports the major IACT analysis
use cases (spectra, maps, lightcurves) and the work outlined below has been
mostly achieved.

A roadmap and release plan post Gammapy v1.0 will be discussed and written in
fall 2019. One option we could envision is to continue to develop Gammapy at a
rapid pace and frequent releases throughout 2020 in the v1.x series, and to
create bugfix releases for v1.0 in a v1.0.x series.

* Gammapy 0.9 in November 2018
* Gammapy 0.10 in January 2019
* Gammapy 0.11 in March 2019
* Gammapy 0.12 in Mai 2019
* Gammapy 0.13 in Juli 2019
* Gammapy 0.14 in September 2019
* Gammapy 0.15 in October 2019
* Gammapy 1.0 in November 2019

There is some flexibility in the schedule within each given month.
With this process we aim to enhance user feedback as well as set intermediate
**milestones for the development progress**.

Meetings
========
We plan to hold **three coding sprints** up to the Gammapy 1.0 release.

We plan to continue the **weekly developers calls** every Friday 10 am.

In addition we could start **monthly Gammapy user calls**, for regular user support
and feedback (to be discussed). We plan to hold **Gammapy workshops and tutorials**
at upcoming science and collaboration meetings (to be disccused).


Projects
========
The actual **development work will be structured in projects**. Each project is
tackled by a team of (at least) two developers. They take over **responsibility
for writing a PIG document** for the project as well as **take care of its actual
implementation**. The PIG will be written in close **collaboration with the lead
development team**. For the implementation we recommend a workflow where typically
one person works on the implementation while the other is available for discussion
and code review. We have defined the following projects:


Maintenance and Code Quality
----------------------------
Continue the clean up process of Gammapy. Improve code, test coverage and test
quality in general. Change to a more uniform code style for tests. Reduce runtime
of tests. Implement required bugfixes. Maintenance is as important as adding new
features, but will be mostly taken over by experienced developers.

Improve the Gammapy development workflow. Improve developer documentation. Define
Github labels, projects and milestones to reflect the content of the roadmap.


Documentation
-------------
Improve documentation structure and content. Improve install instructions.
Improve existing tutorial notebooks and add missing topics.


Data and Observation handling
-----------------------------
Implement support for good time intervals (GTIs). Simplify DL3 data access and
simpify creation of custom index files. Implement support for event types.


IRFs
----
Clean up and partly redesign the `gammapy.irf` sub-package. Implement IRF coordinate
handling, unify axis handling with `gammapy.maps`. Evaluate the use of maps to store
IRFs. Work on the IRF interface and data formats in close collaboration with
`ctapipe`_. Implement support for event types.


Maps
----
Unify coordinate and unit handling in `gammapy.maps`. Migrate the healpix code
from `healpy`_ to ``astropy_healpix``. Finish implementation of multi-resolution
maps (low priority).


Map Analysis / Data Reduction
-----------------------------
Unify and improve integration of background and exposure maps along the energy
axes. Improve performance of the model evaluation by using bounding boxes and
caching (low priority). Add support for healpix maps (low priority). Implement
3D background model creation. Better expose classical image based background
methods such as ring- and adaptive ring-backround. Implement spectral points
estimation with 3D analysis.


Datasets
--------
Implement a ``Dataset`` or ``Observation`` container class, that bundles data and
reduced IRFs and is used to evaluate the likelihood. Enable joint fit across
multiple datasets. Enable joint Fermi-LAT / IACT analyses.


Modeling
--------
Unify quantity support for model evaluation. Implement coordinate frame handling
for spatial models. Implement full support of the XML I/O as well as improve the
existing YAML IO. Add missing models. Implement (hierachical) model parameter
name handling and improve parameter user interface. Add support for baysian priors
on model parameters. Add support for handling tied parameters.


Fitting
-------
Design and implement configuration and result handling. Finish implemention of
the unified fitting front end in ``gammapy.utils.fitting``. Fully support of the
``sherpa`` fitting backend. Add further fitting backends, such as ``scipy.optimize``
or ``emcee``. Implement fitting helper and diagnosis methods to compute likelihood
contours. Improve interactive handling of the fitting front end.


Event Simulation
----------------
Implement event sampler, required for Gammapy to participate and simulate part of
CTA DC2 data.


Timing Analysis
---------------
Rewrite the current lightcurve estimation . Improve the existing ``Lightcurve`` class.
Implement 3D analysis based lightcurve estimation.


High-level interface
--------------------
Implement a config-file based high level analysis interface (e.g. as used in ``fermipy``)
and command line tool. It gives access to limited, pre-scripted standard analysis
workflows. Alternatively the high level analysis interface could generate pre-filled
Python scripts or notebooks, that can be edited and executed by users.


Papers
------
We plan to write a paper on Gammapy in fall 2019, describing Gammapy v1.0.

There will be a HESS validation paper. We will support the paper with implementing
required bugfixes and features on short time scales.

Authors of other papers please also get in contact with the Gammapy team and let
us know about required developments.


Project Management
==================
This roadmap document will result in a series of subsequent PIGs, which are written
and implemented by lead or contributing developers, that take responsibility for
one or multiple of the projects described above. Each of those project PIGs should
define a list of proposed pull requests, with preliminary milestones (version number
as listed above) assigned. For each development project we will create a GitHub
project and list the proposed pull requests as issues under the project. Responsibilities,
updated milestones and discussion on implementation details are discussed in thoses
issues. The general progress of the development work can be tracked using the
GitHub project board.


Decision
========
The PIG was discussed extensively in `GH 1841`_, resulting in many improvements
and changes. The Gammapy roadmap was accepted by the CC, after the deadline for
comments elapsed January 31st.

.. _GH 1841:  https://github.com/gammapy/gammapy/pull/1841
.. _slides: https://forge.in2p3.fr/login?back_url=https%3A%2F%2Fforge.in2p3.fr%2Fprojects%2Fobserver-access-use-cases%2Fwiki%2FScience_Tools_Use-Cases).
.. _indico: https://indico.cta-observatory.org/event/2070/
