.. _gammapy_1p0rc_release:

1.0rc (unreleased)
------------------

- No changes yet
- 14 contributors
- 133 pull requests (not all listed below)

**What's new**

Support for energy dependent ON region spectral extraction has been added. The RADMAX IRF
is now fully supported. A specific `WobbleRegionFinder` has been introduced to find OFF regions.
A set of two test observations have been provided by the MAGIC collaboration to perform
testing and validation of the method. They have been added to the gammapy-data repository.
We thank the Magic collaboration for their contribution.

Documentation has been completely restructured. The PyData Sphinx theme is now applied.
Added automated testing of docstring example code. All docstrings have been fixed.

Improved CI. Use mamba. Added pyflakes step to CI. Parallel execution of notebooks and tests.

**Contributors**
- Fabio Acero
- Arnau Aguasca
- Tyler Cahill
- Axel Donath
- Luca Giunti
- Cosimo Nigro
- Maximilian Nöthe
- Laura Olivera-Nieto
- Dimitri Papadopoulos
- Fabio Pintore
- Quentin Remy
- Jose Enrique Ruiz
- Atreyee Sinha
- Régis Terrier

Pull Requests
+++++++++++++
This list is incomplete. Small improvements and bug fixes are not listed here.
- [#3874] Allow MapDatasetOff in Datasets serialization and avoid read_lazy (Quentin Rémy)
- [#3873] Modify SafeMaskMaker to ignore data only below the background peak (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#3860] Introduce is_norm parameter property (Axel Donath)
- [#3856] Make obs_table optional on DataStore (Régis Terrier)
- [#3846] Allows DataStoreMaker to be used with IRFs not following CALDB structure (Quentin Rémy)
- [#3842] Update SourceCatalog4FGL class to support changes in data release 3 (Quentin Remy)
- [#3837] Allow nearest neighbor interpolation with scalar data (Axel Donath)
- [#3833] Automate generation of codemeta.json and .zenodo.json files (Jose Enrique Ruiz)
- [#3817] Improve documentation theme (Jose Enrique Ruiz)
- [#3810] Fix doc strings in estimators (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#3806] Improve documentation for the DatasetsMaker (Quentin Remy)
- [#3804] Event wise rad max (Maximilian Nöthe)
- [#3802] Use DatasetsMaker in Analysis class (Quentin Remy)
- [#3797] Refactor pointing information handling and Observation.create (Maximilian Nöthe)
- [#3796] Helper function to rebin map axis (Luca Giunti)
- [#3783] Speed docs building process (Jose Enrique Ruiz)
- [#3777] Validate EnergyDispersion2D units (Fabio Pintore)
- [#3761] Execute notebooks in parallel (Maximilian Nöthe)
- [#3760] Fix issues reported by pyflakes and add pyflakes step to ci (Maximilian Nöthe)
- [#3752] Human readable energy units string formatting for plot_interactive & plot_grid (Fabio Acero)
- [#3748] Fix doc strings for makers and datasets (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#3740] Common format axis labels (Fabio Pintore)
- [#3733] Add new RegionsFinder that uses a fixed number of regions symmetrically distributed on the circle (Cosimo Nigro)
- [#3728] Add missing required GADF headers in IRF classes (Maximilian Nöthe)
- [#3722] Switch documentation to PyData Sphinx Theme (Jose Enrique Ruiz)
- [#3720] Add convenience method to write EventLists to file (Laura Olivera Nieto)
- [#3713] Fix matplotlib 3.5+ incompatibility with WcsNDMap.plot() (tmcahill)
- [#3712] Added a notebook tutorial showing an energy-dependent spectrum extraction (Cosimo Nigro)
- [#3699] Use mamba in CI jobs (Maximilian Nöthe)
- [#3684] Started to implement the energy-dependent 1D spectrum extraction (Cosimo Nigro)
- [#3669] Add GeneralizedGaussianTemporalModel (Arnau Aguasca)
- [#3535] Add TemplateNDSpectralModel (Quentin Remy)