.. include:: ../references.txt

.. _gammapy_1p0_release:

1.0 (October 21th, 2022)
-----------------------

Summary
~~~~~~~

- Released Oct 21th, 2022
- 10 contributors
- 78 pull requests since v0.20.1 (not all listed below)

New features
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This new release is the Long Term Stable (LTS) version 1.0. Most of the changes are in the package
infrastructure. A number of improvements and bug corrections have been implemented since v0.20.1.
Gammapy v1.0 adds support for the latest version 0.3 of `gadf`_.

*gammapy.data and gammapy.irf*

- Support for HAWC data has been improved. In particular, a `~gammapy.irf.RecoPSFMap` has been added in IRF
  to support PSF in reco energy.

*gammapy.maps*

- A reprojection method has been implemented on `~gammapy.maps.Map` to allow for reprojection on a new `~gammapy.maps.MapGeom`
  object. It supports different spatial geometries but requires identical non-spatial axes. See
  `~gammapy.maps.Map.reproject_to_geom()`.

*infrastructure*

- The tutorial gallery now relies on Sphinx gallery. The tutorials are python scripts with specific
  syntax for the description cells. This simplifies the documentation build. This will make the history
  cleaner and tutorial code reviews easier. The download button is now moved at the end of the tutorial.
  Binder is now working again for tutorials.
- The compliance with the astropy affiliated packages has been improved. In particular, tox is now
  used for testing and CI.
- Numpy<=1.19 is no longer supported.

API changes
~~~~~~~~~~~

*gammapy.modeling*

- `~gammapy.modeling.models.LightCurveTemplateTemporalModel` internally relies on a `~gammapy.maps.RegionNDMap`
  and does not take a table on `__init__` anymore. To create one from a `Table` object, users have to go through
  `~gammapy.modeling.models.LightCurveTemplateTemporalModel.read()` or `~gammapy.modeling.models.LightCurveTemplateTemporalModel.from_table`.


Bug fixes and improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*gammapy.astro*

- The DM annihilation spectral model `~gammapy.astro.darkmatter.DarkMatterAnnihilationSpectralModel` can now be serialized
  to yaml.

*gammapy.data*

- An `~gammapy.data.Observation.copy()` method has been implemented to allow modification of
  existing `~gammapy.data.Observation` objects.

*gammapy.datasets*

- The dataset name is now serialized with the Dataset as the `NAME` keyword in the primary HDU.
- A `peek` method is now available for the `~gammapy.datasets.MapEvaluator` to help debugging issues
  with model evaluation on a `~gammapy.datasets.Dataset`.

*gammapy.makers*

- Adapt the `~gammapy.makers.MapDatasetMaker` to handle the DL3 format introduced in g.a.d.f. v0.3 for drifting
  instruments.

*gammapy.maps*

- `~gammapy.maps.RegionNDMap.sample_coord()` has been implemented to generate events from a region map.

*gammapy.modeling*

- A bug has been corrected in the `~gammapy.modeling.models.TemporalModel`
  `~gammapy.modeling.models.TemporalModel.sample_time()` method. An incorrect unit handling made
  times incorrectly sampled for the `~gammapy.modeling.models.TemplateLightCurveTemporalModel`.
- `~gammapy.modeling.models.TemporalModel.integrate()` now provides a generic integration method.
- A new `~gammapy.modeling.models.TemplatePhaseCurveTemporalModel` has been added to support pulsar-like lightcurves.
- To allow for identical parameter names, the serialization of the covariance matrix does no longer
  export the parameter names as column headers but simply as the first entry in each row.

*gammapy.stats*

- For consistency with the convention of `errn` and `errp` in the `Estimator` classes, which are
  always positve quantities, the sign of the value returned by `~gammapy.stats.CountsStatistic.compute_errn()`
  has been changed.

Contributors
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Arnau Aguasca
- Axel Donath
- Luca Giunti
- Mireia Nievas-Rosillo
- Laura Olivera-Nieto
- Fabio Pintore
- Quentin Rémy
- Brigitta Sipőcz
- Atreyee Sinha
- Régis Terrier

Pull Requests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This list is incomplete. Small improvements and bug fixes are not listed here.
- [#4119] simplification of np.array(set(labels)) (Mireia Nievas-Rosillo)
- [#4115] Add code of conduct file (Axel Donath)
- [#4113] Move binder configuration to gammapy-webpage (Axel Donath)
- [#4112] Add pre commit hooks and black CI (Axel Donath)
- [#4108] Add tests with HAWC data (Laura Olivera-Nieto)
- [#4107] Implement peek methods for map evaluator and psf kernel (luca GIUNTI)
- [#4106] Reactivate gammapy download command (Axel Donath)
- [#4105] Fix WcsNDMap upsampling along axis (Quentin Remy)
- [#4103] Activate binder for tutorials (Axel Donath)
- [#4098] Fixed test failure after introducing new MAGIC RAD_MAX files (Cosimo Nigro)
- [#4095] Filling of the glossary (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#4093] Update Astropy package template (Axel Donath)
- [#4089] Change sign of the value returned by CountsStatistic.compute_errn (Axel Donath)
- [#4088] Add sample_coord for RegionNDMap (Régis Terrier)
- [#4084] Adapt TemplateTemporalModel to use a RegionNDMap internally (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4083] Implement Observation.copy() and tests (Axel Donath)
- [#4080] Use sphinx gallery for tutorials (Axel Donath)
- [#4079] Update of the mailmap for the git push management (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#4076] Allow for DRIFT mode observations in the MapDatasetMaker (Laura Olivera-Nieto)
- [#4075] Validate nside parameter for HpxGeom  (luca GIUNTI)
- [#4073] Make spatial coordinates optional in RegionNDMap.interp_by_coord() (Axel Donath)
- [#4071] Add tag on DM Annihilation spectral model (Régis Terrier)
- [#4067] Fix bug on TemporalModel.sample_time() (Fabio PINTORE)
- [#4058] Serialisation in the primary HDU of the Dataset name (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#4054] Update temporal model docs (aaguasca)
- [#4051] Using astropy Table indices on ObservationTable (Régis Terrier)
- [#4044] Addition of a tutorial about the 1D analysis with the HLI (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#4043] Colour blind friendly visualisations (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#4037] Implement IRF.slice_by_idx() (Axel Donath)
- [#4026] Fix TemplateSpatialModel overwrite (Quentin Remy)
- [#4025] Add support for PSF in reco energy (Quentin Remy)
- [#4024] Add HowTo for adding phase column  (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4022] Introduce consistent .rename_axes and .rename API for maps (Quentin Remy)
- [#4018] Computation of the WcsMap kernel at the nearest valid exposure (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#4017] Introduce a phase curve model (Régis Terrier)
- [#4015] Allow to stack mask_fit in Dataset.stack (Quentin Remy)
- [#4014] Avoid unnecessary copy in Map.stack (Quentin Remy)
- [#4013] Fix zeros errors in models created from 3HWC catalog (Quentin Remy)
- [#4000] MNT: Raise error rather than silently proceed (Brigitta Sipőcz)
- [#3956] Safe mask range on the 1D spectrum tutorial (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#3950] PIG 23 - Gammapy Release Cycle and Version Numbering (Régis Terrier)
- [#3925] Temporal model integration (Axel Donath)
- [#3862] Add Map.reproject method (Quentin Remy)
