.. _gammapy_1p1_release:

1.1 (May XXth 2023)
-------------------

- Released June 8th, 2023
- 17 contributors
- 129 pull requests since v1.0 (not all listed below)
- 85 closed issues

Summary
~~~~~~~

This release introduces a number of new features as well as some performance improvements.

Support for energy dependent temporal models is introduced. Only template models are supported.
They use a `RegionNDMap` object with an energy and a time axis. Note that these models
are meant for event simulation with the `MapDatasetEventSampler` and cannot be used
for modeling and fitting.

A tutorial demonstrating how to simulate events using this type of models has been added.

Support for multiprocessing is improved. `FluxPointsEstimator` and `LightCurveEstimator`
can now run on several cores. This is defined with the `n_jobs` parameter that can be set on
init. The backend used by default is the python multiprocessing. This interface is also used
by the `DatasetsMaker` that performs the data reduction loop.

A first step in the separation of the internal data model and the GADF format is introduced
in this release in the handling of the pointing and the GTI. This is part of a larger project
that will be implemented in the coming feature releases to allow I/O with multiple data formats.

New features
~~~~~~~~~~~~

*gammapy.data*

- A new function `~gammapy.data.get_irfs_features()` can extract the features of IRFs
  (such as energy resolution bias or PSF radius) of a list of `Observation`. The output
  list can then be passed to the function `~gammapy.utils.cluster.hierarchical_clustering()`
  which will find clusters of IRF features allowing to combine `Observation` with similar
  IRF characteristics during analysis.

*gammapy.maps*

- A `Map.reorder_axes` helper method has been introduced.
- Dot product is now supported with the `Map.dot()` function. It applies the dot product on
  the axes sharing the same name. It can also be called via the `@` operator.
- A `WcsNDMap.to_region_nd_map_histogram()` helper method is introduced to compute
  the histogram of the map values along the spatial dimensions for each non spatial axes
  bins.

*gammapy.modeling*

- The `~gammapy.modeling.models.LightCurveTemplateTemporalModel` now supports energy dependent
  light curve templates. These models are now created from a `Map` object with a `time` axis
  and optionally with an `energy_true` axis. They can be read from an `~astropy.table.Table`
  (only regular light curve models) or from a serialized `Map`. For now, the energy dependent
  models cannot be used for analysis.
- A new function `~gammapy.modeling.select_nested_models` has been introduced to perform
  nested model fits and compute the resulting test statistic (TS) between two nested hypotheses.
  It can be used to determine whether the addition of a source to the model is significant or
  to test for specific features in a model (e.g. test the existence of a spectral cutoff).
 - A new method has been added on `SpectralModel.spectral_index_error()` to compute
  the spectral index at a given energy as well as its error by error propagation of
  the covariance matrix elements.
- The Franceschini (2018) and Saldana-Lopez (2021) EBL are now part of the built-ins
  EBL models.
- A spatial correction model can now be added to the `~gammapy.modeling.models.FoVBackgroundModel`.
  It can be used with a new spatial model, the `~gammapy.modeling.models.PiecewiseNormSpatialModel`.


*gammapy.estimators*

- Multiprocessing is now supported for `FluxPointsEstimator` and `LightCurveEstimator`. Setting
  the number of cores used is done with the `n_jobs` property that is available on these
  classes.

*gammapy.visualization*

- A function to plot `Map` as RGB is now proposed: `~gammapy.visualization.plot_map_rgb()`.
- A function to plot the spectral distributions of predicted counts of models defined
  on a `Dataset` is now available : `~gammapy.visualization.plot_npred_signal()`

*documentation*

- A new tutorial to demonstrate how to use Gammapy with HAWC data.
- The pulsar analysis tutorial now shows how to create a `MapDatasetOnOff` using phase
  information.
- A new tutorial demonstrating event sampling with energy dependent temporal models has
  been added.

*infrastructure*

- Deprecation warnings can now be raised by Gammapy deprecated code. The warnings will appear
  in the documentation and docstrings as well. Deprecated features will usually be removed
  in the following feature release.
- Minimal python version is now 3.9. Python 3.10 is supported as well.

API changes
~~~~~~~~~~~

*gammapy.data*

- The `Observation.pointing_radec` and `Observation.pointing_altaz` `Observation.pointing_zen`
  are now deprecated. One should use `Observation.get_pointing_icrs(time)` instead. This approach
  will support different pointing strategies. In most cases, taking the pointing at the mid
  time of an observation is sufficient. This is provided by the property `Observation.tmid`.
- To separate data format and data model and to support observations with fixed pointing,
  the `~gammapy.data.FixedPointingInfo` has been restructured. Most of its properties
  have been deprecated. The main functions are `FixedPointingInfo.get_icrs(time, location)` and
  `FixedPointingInfo.get_altaz(time, location)`
- the `GTI` now consists in a simple `Table` with `START` and `STOP` as `~astropy.time.Time`
  object. `GTI.table` no longer contains a GADF formatted table with columns representing
  start and stop time as METs (Mission Elpased Time). All methods should behave equivalently
  with the same interface.

*gammapy.irf*

- `~gammapy.irf.load_cta_irfs` is now deprecated. Use instead the more general
  `~gammapy.irf.load_irf_dict_from_file`

*gammapy.modeling*

- The `FitResult.iminuit` attribute is now deprecated. It should be accessed from `optimize_result`
  property instead, via: `FitResult.optimize_result.iminuit`.

*gammapy.utils*

- The `~gammapy.utils.table.table_from_row_data()` is now deprecated. It can be simply replaced
  by the regular constructor : `Table(rows)`.

Bug fixes and improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- The `Map.fill_events()` method now supports adding weights to the input events.
- The output of the `FitResult` has been clarified in some failure cases.
- The energy dependent RADMAX cut is now supported by the `~gammapy.makers.PhaseBackgroundMaker`.
- A `scale` attribute was added to `TemporalModel` classes. It is used to treat the `t_ref`
  parameter in a consistent manner via a `TemporalModel.reference_time` that converts the
  parameter (defined in mjd) in a proper `~astropy.time.Time`. It avoids comparing
  inconsistent scales when evaluating temporal models.
- The `~gammapy.estimators.TSMapEstimator` now accepts `MapDatasetOnOff` as well
  as regular `MapDataset`.
- `FluxPoints.plot()` now includes a `time_format` argument to adapt the time display in the
  resulting plot (can be either `iso` or `mjd`).
- Units representation in plot labels is improved using `to_sting(latex_inline)`. The default
  behavior can be changed adapting the global variable `UNIT_STRING_FORMAT` defined in
  `~gammapy.maps.axes`.


Contributors
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Arnau Aguasca
- Axel Donath
- Kirsty Feijen
- Luca Giunti
- Lucas Gréaux
- Bruno Khélifi
- Maximilian Linhoff
- Simone Mender
- Lars Mohrmann
- Cosimo Nigro
- Laura Olivera-Nieto
- Fabio Pintore
- Maxime Regeard
- Quentin Remy
- Atreyee Sinha
- Katrin Streil
- Régis Terrier

Pull Requests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This list is incomplete. Small improvements and bug fixes are not listed here.

- [#4545] Tutorial on event sampling for energy dependent temporal models (Fabio Pintore)
- [#4521] Add covariance copy to support ray (Axel Donath)
- [#4510] Introduce WcsNDMap.cutout_and_mask_region (Axel Donath)
- [#4508] Implement WcsNDMap.to_region_nd_map_histogram (Axel Donath)
- [#4506] Rename append method of MapAxis and LabelMapAxis to concatenate (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4504] Deprecate Fit.minuit member (Axel Donath)
- [#4500] Fix SpectrumDatasetOnOff.stat_sum to support when counts_off is None (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#4495] Introduce move_axis method on Map (Régis Terrier)
- [#4486] Scale handling in temporal models (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4466] Add tutorial for the use of HAWC data (Laura Olivera-Nieto)
- [#4459] Evaluation of energy dep temporal model (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4458] adding weights option to fill_events (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4453] Add scale in temporal model (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4444] Integral sensitivity in FluxPointsEstimator (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4435] Fix wrong ticks in rad_max plot (Simone Mender)
- [#4430] Add squash method to LabelMapAxis (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4428] Add .to_string() to axis y/xlabel (Arnau Aguasca)
- [#4418] Update the _evaluate_timevar_source function in MapDatasetEventSampler (Fabio PINTORE)
- [#4417] adding from_stack and append to LabelMapAxis (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4412] LightCurveTemplateModel serialisation (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4409] Add a function that plot the npred_signal of models of a dataset (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4406] Add configuration and helper function to run multiprocessing or ray (Quentin Remy)
- [#4402] Support for parallel evaluation in FluxPointsEstimator (Quentin Remy)
- [#4397] Fix plot_spectrum_datasets_off_regions with too many regions (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#4395] Add the possibility to plot in MJD the light curves (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#4393] Iminuit output (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#4380] Adapt default offset for plotting point like IRFs (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4370] Implement the _sample_coord_time_energy function in MapDatasetEventSampler (Fabio PINTORE)
- [#4369] Pulsar analysis tutorial (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4359] Fix interpolation values_scale in TemplateSpatialModel (Quentin Remy)
- [#4352] Adding rad max cut in PhaseBackgroundMaker (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4350] Always use FixedPointingInfo from events header in DataStore (Maximilian Linhoff)
- [#4346] Add helper functions for delta TS to significance conversion (Quentin Remy)
- [#4336] Change label units within parentheses to brackets (Arnau Aguasca)
- [#4326] Introduce internal data model for GTI (Régis Terrier)
- [#4324] Fix Parameter init if scale is not one (Quentin Remy)
- [#4305] Add SpectralModel.spectral_index_error (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4301] Add TIMESYS to lightcurve table meta (Régis Terrier)
- [#4294] Addition of a Map.dot operator (Régis Terrier)
- [#4288] Add MapDatasetOnOff type test and associated error for TSMapEstimator (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4282] Add from_region() to DiskSpatialModel (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4280] Allow to load observations with only IRFs defined (Quentin Remy)
- [#4277] Fix datasets io with RecoPSFMap (Quentin Remy)
- [#4275] Remove safe mask in background stacking (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4264] Deprecate load_cta_irfs, replace usage with load_irf_dict_from_file (Maximilian Linhoff)
- [#4252] Map dataset on off in phase maker (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4245] Added an evaluate method for CompoundSpectralModel (Lucas Gréaux)
- [#4243] Change _check_intervals from PhaseBackgroundMaker (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4242] Add Observations clustering by IRFs quality (Quentin Remy)
- [#4231] Fix bug in safe mask computation for SpectrumDatasetOnOff (Lars Mohrmann)
- [#4219] Allow reading of IRF files with single-value axes (Lars Mohrmann)
- [#4216] Add TestStatisticNested class (Quentin Remy)
- [#4215] Adds built-in Franceschini (2018) and Saldana-Lopez (2021) EBL models (Cosimo Nigro)
- [#4213] Add deprecation warning system (Régis Terrier)
- [#4212] Remove unneeded table util function (Maximilian Linhoff)
- [#4210] Add plot_rgb() function in gammapy.visualization (luca GIUNTI)
- [#4209] Add support for spatial model correction on background models (Quentin Remy)
- [#4208] Add PiecewiseNormSpatialModel (Quentin Remy)
- [#4191] Modified Dark Matter Jfactor Computation and Dark Matter Tutorial (Katrin Streil)