.. _gammapy_1p2_release:

1.2 (February 29th 2024)
------------------------

- Released February 29, 2024
- 25 contributors
- 215 pull requests since v1.1 (not all listed below)
- 69 closed issues

Summary
~~~~~~~

New features
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Metadata containers have been introduced following PIG 25. Preliminary versions have
  been designed for most data products from DL3 to DL5. They will progressively be
  accessible on their `.meta` attributes.
- Parameter prior support has been introduced following PIG 26. A few `Prior` classes
  can be defined on `Parameter.prior` and the associated log-prior is added to the
  total statistics during fitting.
- Helper functions have been added to perform computation of lifetime and total
  observation time maps.
- A preliminary support for asymmetric IRFs has been introduced. A tutorial shows how to
  implement new IRF classes to support non-axisymmetric IRFs.
- Improved support for temporal analysis with the addition of helper functions to quantify
  lightcurve variability.
- New helper classes have been added to perform event sampling for a single or a set of
  observations:
  `~gammapy.datasets.ObservationEventSampler` and `~gammapy.data.ObservationsEventSampler`.
- A checksum option has been added on read and write methods in Gammapy. It follows the
  FITS standard and reuses the astropy methods and behaviour. A checksum for yaml file
  has been introduced as well.
- Improved support for parallel processing

*gammapy.catalogs*

- Update the 4FGL catalog to include DR4.
- Added 1LHAASO catalog.

*gammapy.data*

- A general scheme for metadata support has been introduced. The ``Metadata`` base
  class has been designed according to PIG 25.
- Added a function to remove a time interval from a ``GTI``.
- Added function to export part of a ``DataStore`` to an IVOA compliant ObsCore table.

*gammapy.makers*

- Prototype support for asymmetric IRF in Gammapy's ``Maker`` classes.
  A tutorial exposing how to create such IRFs has been added.

*gammapy.maps*

- Implement ``TimeMapAxis.pix_to_coord()``
- Implement ``TimeMapAxis.to_gti()``

*gammapy.modeling*

- Added a function to determine a pivot energy for all spectral models.
- Added position as a parameter for the ``TemplateSpatialModel``. CAVEAT: results are correct only when the fitted position is close to the map center.
- Added Spatial parameters in FoVBackgroundModels
- SkyModel evaluation now supports a TimeMapAxis
- Adapt FluxPointsDataset to directly fit lightcurves

*gammapy.estimators*

- Add a ``slice_by_coord()`` function on ``FluxMaps``.
- Introduce timing utility functions: point to point flux variance, fractional excess
  variance, doubling/halving times for light curves
- Add optional sensitivity estimation in ``ExcessMapEstimator``.
- Added support for NormSpectralModels in FluxPointsDataset / FluxPoints computations
- Fit status and degrees of freedom have been added to ``FluxMaps``.
- Add a dedicated ``EnergyDependentMorphologyEstimator`` as well as a tutorial demonstrating
  its usage.
- Add functionality to rebin flux points using the likelihood profiles.
- GTI tables are now serialised on FluxPoints objects.

*gammapy.visualization*

- Add a plot function for the distribution of ``Map`` data.


API changes
~~~~~~~~~~~

- Source parameters are now frozen on init in ``FluxEstimator`` classes.
- The ``norm`` parameter is now passed as an argument to the various flux estimators.
  ``Parameter.is_norm`` is now deprecated.
- The default index of ``ExpCutoffPowerlawNormSpectralModel`` has been changed to 0
  for consistency with the ``PowerlawNormSpectralModel``.

Bug fixes and improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Correct ``MapDataset.info_dict()`` to use background model rather than IRF background when
  giving excess counts and significance.
- Import ray only when needed.
- Added information on number of degrees of freedom on ``FluxMaps`` and ``FluxPoints`` objects.
- Reduced memory usage of ``MapEvaluator`` and ``PSFMap.get_psf_kernel()``.
- Added support for multiprocessing in ``FluxProfileEstimator``.
- Added multiprocessing for ``WcsNDMap`` convolution.
- Add a context manager for multiprocessing.
- Add a faster reprojection method : ``reproject_by_image``.
- Use interpolation for dark matter mass. Add Zhao profile and
  ``DarkMatterDecaySpectralModel``.
- The asymmetric errors and upper limit calculations in ``CashCountsStatistic``
  have been replaced by an equivalent analytical expression.


Documentation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~



Contributors
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Fabio Acero
- Juan Bernete
- Noah Biederbeck
- Julia Djuvsland
- Axel Donath
- Kirsty Feijen
- Stefan Fröse
- Claudio Galelli
- Bruno Khélifi
- Jana Konrad
- Paula Kornecki
- Maximilian Linhoff
- Kurt McKee
- Simone Mender
- Daniel Morcuende
- Laura Olivera-Nieto
- Fabio Pintore
- Michael Punch
- Maxime Regeard
- Quentin Remy
- Atreyee Sinha
- Hanna Stapel
- Katrin Streil
- Régis Terrier
- Tim Unbehaun

Pull Requests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This list is incomplete. Small improvements and bug fixes are not listed here.

- [#5044] Add stat_null computation on ParameterEstimator (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#5040] Add degrees of freedom on FluxMaps (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#5015] Examples of radially asymmetric IRFs (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4994] Spatial parameters in FovBackgroundModel (Katrin Streil)
- [#4992] Adding a function to guess the format of a FluxPoints object for serialization (Claudio Galelli)
- [#4989] Reduce memory usage of MapEvaluator (Quentin Remy)
- [#4978] Support negative offset for Background2d.to_3d (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4975] Reduce memory usage of get_psf_kernel (Quentin Remy)
- [#4973] Add position as a parameter for TemplateSpatialModel (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4971] Use `FixedPointingInfo` in notebook (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4970] Adapt FluxPointsDataset to fit light curves (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4942] Parallel support for FluxProfileEstimation (Quentin Remy)
- [#4940] Fix MapEvaluator for the apply_edisp=False case (Quentin Remy)
- [#4937] Fix import of angular_separation for astropy 6 (Maximilian Linhoff)
- [#4936] PiecewiseNormSpectralModel serialising interp (Katrin Streil)
- [#4917] Add new class to directly simulate observations (Maximilian Linhoff)
- [#4904] Deprecate is_norm on parameter (Quentin Remy)
- [#4902] Add norm attribute to estimators and deprecate previous norm related attributes (Quentin Remy)
- [#4886] Introduce hierarchical metadata structures (Régis Terrier)
- [#4879] Fix energy dependent temporal model simulation (Quentin Remy)
- [#4854] Notebook to sphinx-gallery script (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4851] Parallel support for WcsNDMap map convolution (Quentin Remy)
- [#4850] Add utility function to split dataset into multiple datasets (Quentin Remy)
- [#4849] Add TimeMapAxis.to_gti() (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4847] Variability tutorial (Claudio Galelli)
- [#4845] Add context manager for multiprocessing configuration (Quentin Remy)
- [#4837] Add checksum argument to gammapy products write functions (Régis Terrier)
- [#4835] Management of metadata for `Models` (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#4834] Adding prior stat sum to datasets (Katrin Streil)
- [#4829] Caching gti and radmax (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4828] Adapt SkyModel to evaluate on TimeMapAxis (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4822] Add a function to delete a time interval from GTI (Claudio Galelli)
- [#4817] Computation of total observation time map (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4814] Introduce a function to compute the doubling/halving time for a lightcurve (Claudio Galelli)
- [#4810] Adding a tutorial for observational clustering (Astro-Kirsty)
- [#4808] adding `Observations` in memory generator (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4805] Description of the arguments of the class `Observation` (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#4802] Adapt detect tutorial to include flux parameters in find peaks (Astro-Kirsty)
- [#4785] Use interpolation for dark matter mass (Stefan Fröse)
- [#4783] Add EnergyDependentMorphologyEstimator (Astro-Kirsty)
- [#4770] Raise error if the predicted event number is too large in event sampling (Fabio PINTORE)
- [#4759] Display the default model parameters in docstrings (Astro-Kirsty)
- [#4753] Removes size 1 array to scalar conversion deprecation warnings from numpy (Régis Terrier)
- [#4750] Support pydantic v2.0 (Axel Donath)
- [#4741] Add Zhao profile (Stefan Fröse)
- [#4740] Add DarkMatterDecaySpectralModel (Stefan Fröse)
- [#4738] Introduce Observation metadata container (Régis Terrier)
- [#4729] Change default index for  NormSpectralModel (Quentin Remy)
- [#4726] Introduce a function to compute the point-to-point fractional variance (Claudio Galelli)
- [#4714] Replace CashCountsStatistic error calculation by analytical expression (Régis Terrier)
- [#4703] Update 4FGL catalog default  to DR4 (Quentin Remy)
- [#4697] Deduce pointing mode from arguments in FixedPointingInfo (Maximilian Linhoff)
- [#4677] Fix wcs.array_shape  definition in WcsGeom.create (Quentin Remy)
- [#4671] Introduce metadata base class (Régis Terrier)
- [#4669] Add the progress bar for the DataStore (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#4668] Multidimensional geom support in SkyModel.integrate_geom and evaluate_geom (Régis Terrier)
- [#4664] Add a faster reprojection method  : reproject_by_image (Quentin Remy)
- [#4660] Add function to convert hermes maps to gammapy compatible format (Quentin Remy)
- [#4657] Fix the FluxProfileEstimator to take into account models (Quentin Remy)
- [#4638] Add a `from_stack` method on `Observations` (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4635] Add function to determine pivot energy for any spectral model (Astro-Kirsty)
- [#4628] Match energy binning per decade to pyirf's (JBernete)
- [#4620] Adding prior class (Katrin Streil)
- [#4615] Improve sensitivity example (Maximilian Linhoff)
- [#4608] Add a slice_by_coord function for FluxMaps (Claudio Galelli)
- [#4599] Add a SafeMaskMaker at DL3 level (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4595] Add 1LHAASO to gammapy.catalog (Quentin Remy)
- [#4584] Add optional sensitivity computation in ExcessMapEstimator (Quentin Remy)
- [#4574] Fixing if statements in OGIPDatasetWriter (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4567] Freeze source parameters in FluxEstimator (Régis Terrier)
- [#4561] Export Datastore to Obscore table (PaulaKx)
- [#4546] Remove is_ul column in FluxPointsEstimator if no upper limit is defined (Astro-Kirsty)
- [#4540] Add function to extract values from FluxMaps (Astro-Kirsty)
- [#4501] Exposing computation of the fractional excess variance (Claudio Galelli)
- [#4491] PIG 27 - Metadata structure (Régis Terrier)
- [#4485] Implement TimeMapAxis.pix_to_coord (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4432] Serialise gti table to flux points object (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#4408] Add plot function for 1D distribution of map data (REGEARD Maxime)
- [#4381] PIG 16 - Model Priors API (Noah Biederbeck)
- [#4217] FluxPointsDataset support model with spatial template and NormSpectralModel (Quentin Remy)