.. include:: ../references.txt

.. _gammapy_1p3_release:

1.3 (November 26, 2024)
-----------------------

- Released November 26, 2024
- 25 contributors
- 212 pull requests since v1.2 (not all listed below)
- 75 closed issues

Summary
~~~~~~~

This release introduces a number of performance improvements, new features and bug fixes.
Improved support is provided for joint analysis with different event types.
There has been significant code cleanup, specially with respect to the documentation and three new
tutorials have been added.

This release is compatible with numpy >=2.0.
Sherpa dependency has been fixed to >4.16


API changes
~~~~~~~~~~~

One  API-breaking change has been introduced in this version:

- The order of arguments in the `~gammapy.modeling.models.FoVBackgroundModel` has been modified; `dataset_name` is now a required first positional argument.

Features deprecated since Gammapy v1.2 have been removed.

Infrastructure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Matomo is now used for website analytics, replacing Google Analytics.


Documentation improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- The pydata-sphinx-theme version used to build the documentation has been updated. The overall appearance has therefore changed a bit.
- Tutorials are now ordered in a logical workflow in each category.
- Three new tutorials have been added: 
   - one on modeling the EBL absorption
   - one exposing the general API of `gammapy.estimators` and `~gammapy.estimators.FluxMaps`
   - one performing time-dependent spectroscopy
- Code examples have been added in docstrings.


New features
~~~~~~~~~~~~

*gammapy.catalogs*

- Support for the 2PC and 3PC pulsar catalogs from Fermi-LAT has been added.


*gammapy.datasets*

- Performance improvement in Fermi-LAT analysis has been implemented with adaptations in PSF kernel computation.
- Stacking of acceptance maps has been improved.


*gammapy.maps*

- Multiple non-spatial axes are now supported in MapDataset creation. Full likelihood computation with additional axes is not yet supported.
- Map axes with periodic boundary conditions are now supported.
- An error is raised for maps with invalid input shapes instead of silently broadcasting.

*gammapy.estimators*

- Added support for joint TS map : `TSMapEstimator.run()` now accepts `Datasets` as input.
- Maps of likelihood profiles can now be computed with the `~gammapy.estimators.TSMapEstimator` via the argument : `selection_optional = ["stat_scan"]`.
- Bin-wise likelihood profiles are now stored on `~gammapy.estimators.FluxMaps`.
- `~gammapy.estimtors.FluxMaps` obtained from different datasets (eg: different event types) can be combined.
- Added a function to combine flux maps in `~gammapy.estimators.utils.combine_flux_maps`. The combination
  uses the likelihood profile maps if available otherwise Gaussian approximation is used.
- Added alpha maps to the output of `~gammapy.estimators.ExcessMapEstimator`.

*gammapy.stats*

- Timmer-Koenig algorithm with leakage protection for simulating a time series from a power spectrum has been implemented.
- Discrete structure function for a variable source using the Emmanoulopoulos et al. (2010) algorithm has been added.
- Discrete cross correlation function computation has been added.

*gammapy.modeling*

- The `~gammapy.modeling.FitResult` object is now exposed as an important API element, combining the results from the optimisation and covariance of the fit. It can be saved to disk in the form of a yaml file thanks to a new `~gammapy.modeling.FitResult.write()` function.
- Unique naming of model parameters has been adapted, leading to resolution of issues with covariance matrix computation for complex model lists.
- Time scale issues in simulation energy dependent temporal models has been resolved.


Bug fixes and improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- ON and OFF phase intervals are copied in `~gammapy.makers.PhaseBackgroundMaker`.
- Added min_pix option in `~gammapy.maps.WcsGeom.cutout`.
- Added copy method on `~gammapy.estimators.FluxMaps`.
- Fixed `~gammapy.modeling.select_nested_models` if there is no free parameters for the null hypothesis.
- Allowed extrapolation only along spatial dimension in `mask_safe_edisp`.
- Fixed `cutout_template_models` to work if models is None.
- Fixed angle wrapping of spatial parameters in `~gammapy.modeling.models.PiecewiseNormSpatialModel`.
- Fixed map evaluation if no ``edisp`` is set.
- Added missing parallel processing options.
- Added `~gammapy.maps.TimeMapAxis.to_table()`.
- Added a warning in `~gammapy.modeling.models.TemplateSpatialModel` for presence of nan values.
- Fixed ignored overwrite in `~gammapy.datasets.Datasets.write`.
- Improved plotting of spectral residuals by removing the mask in computation but rather adding a visual mask.
- Added strict option to `~gammapy.maps.MapAxis.downsample`.
- Fixed `~gammapy.data.ObservationsEventsSampler` for observations based on full-enclosure IRFs.
- Added a method to normalize `~gammapy.modeling.models.TemplatePhaseCurveTemporalModel`.
- Definition of `UniformPrior` has been fixed to return 0 within min and max values instead of 1.


Contributors
~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Fabio Acero
- Arnau Aguasca-Cabot
- Axel Donath
- Kirsty Feijen
- Stefan Fröse
- Claudio Galelli
- Bruno Khélifi
- Maximilian Linhoff
- Lars Mohrmann
- Daniel Morcuende
- Laura Olivera Nieto
- Mireia Nievas
- Michele Peresano
- Fabio Pintore
- Maxime Regeard
- Quentin Remy
- Gerrit Roellinghoff
- Vasco Schiavo
- Atreyee Sinha
- Brigitta Sipőcz
- Hanna Stapel
- Régis Terrier
- Santiago Vila
- Samantha Wong
- Pei Yu


Pull Requests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This list is incomplete. Small improvements and bug fixes are not listed here.

- [#5545] Fix ObservationsEventsSampler for observations based on full-enclosure IRFs (Michele Peresano)
- [#5525] Norm TemplatePhaseCurveTemporalModel (Maxime Regeard)
- [#5472] Add the Matomo tracker into our documentation web pages (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#5466] Improve the time resolved spectroscopy tutorial (Claudio Galelli)
- [#5462] Update all the documentation with the new name of CTA : CTAO (Bruno Khélifi)
- [#5453] Fix time shift from sampled events with `MapDatasetEventSampler` (Fabio Pintore)
- [#5449] combine_flux_maps  supports for different energy axes (Quentin Remy)
- [#5448] Fix typo in Uniform prior returned value (Fabio Acero)
- [#5445] Add a to_table() method to TimeMapAxis (Claudio Galelli)
- [#5438] Speed up event sampler (Fabio Pintore)
- [#5437] Remove mask in residual plotting (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#5433] Sort sampled events by time in `MapDatasetEventSampler` (Fabio Pintore)
- [#5427] A time resolved spectroscopy estimator (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#5423] Function for the discrete cross correlation function (Claudio Galelli)
- [#5409] Add strict option to `MapAxis.downsample` (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#5408] Add alpha maps to `ExcessMapEstimator` (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#5407] Add an API tutorial for Estimators (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#5405] Add missing parallel options (Quentin Remy)
- [#5390] Fix region evaluation without psf convolution (Quentin Remy)
- [#5389] Fix `LabelMapAxis` so it doesn't reorder the labels (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#5385] Fix reco_exposure computation with mask safe in ExcessMapEstimator (Quentin Remy)
- [#5382] Fix and tweaks for the stat_scan in TSMapEstimator (Quentin Remy)
- [#5381] Apply safe mask in TSMapEstimator (Quentin Remy)
- [#5380] Add max_niter as option in TSMapEstimator (Quentin Remy)
- [#5378] Observations `__getitem__` method addition (Maxime Regeard)
- [#5370] Add offset mask to make_effective_livetime_map (Quentin Remy)
- [#5366] Remove use of np.rint in pix_tuple_to_idx (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#5356] Brought gammapy.visualization.plot_distribution in line with its documentation (Gerrit Roellinghoff)
- [#5353] Add support for joint TSmap estimation (Quentin Remy)
- [#5350] Adapt `RadMax2D.plot_rad_max_vs_energy` (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#5346] Add examples to fit function docstrings (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#5342] Fix evaluation if no edisp is set (Quentin Remy)
- [#5320] Fix parameters unique names (Quentin Remy)
- [#5316] Add CovarianceMixin for multicomponent models classes (Quentin Remy)
- [#5314] Improve get_psf_kernel performance (Quentin Remy)
- [#5312] More complex background spectral model exposed (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#5304] introducing a `filename` argument to TemplateSpatialModel.write (Fabio Pintore)
- [#5303] QOL changes in Timmer&Konig (Claudio Galelli)
- [#5300] Fix wrap in PiecewiseNormSpatialModel (Quentin Remy)
- [#5298] Coherent units in `TemporalModel.sample_time` (Fabio Pintore)
- [#5297] Precompute the PSF Kernel if the PSFMap has only one bin (Quentin Remy)
- [#5289] Add new methods for combine_flux_maps to use likelihood profile or its approximation (Quentin Remy)
- [#5285] Add support for stat_scan in TSMapEstimator (Quentin Remy)
- [#5280] Add min_pix option in WcsGeom.cutout and set it to 3 for IRFs (Quentin Remy)
- [#5279] Add copy method on FluxMaps (Quentin Remy)
- [#5275] Add a notebook for EBL correction example (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#5271] Allow extrapolation only along spatial dimension in `mask_safe_edisp` (Quentin Remy)
- [#5270] Modify acceptance stacking behavior (Régis Terrier)
- [#5269] Add leakage protection factor in the Timmer Konig algorithm (Claudio Galelli)
- [#5258] Add write function to `FitResult` (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#5255] Expose `FitResult` (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#5254] Make non-FITS table file from FluxPoints overwritable (Michele Peresano)
- [#5222] Allow `MapAxis` to be passed in `SpectralModel.plot()` (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#5207] Specify the models with duplicated name in `Models` (Fabio Pintore)
- [#5206] Convert negative `npred` values to zero in `MapDatasetEventSampler` (Fabio Pintore)
- [#5205] Specify the sampled model in `MapDatasetEventSampler` (Fabio Pintore)
- [#5200] Use two argument form of Time to parse reference time (Maximilian Linhoff)
- [#5188] Raise an error if the geometry of the exclusion mask passed to `ReflectedRegionsBackgroundMaker` is not an image (Maxime Regeard)
- [#5186] Adjust `to_edisp_kernel` input to `MapAxis` (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#5184] Support additional axes in Mapdataset.create (Régis Terrier)
- [#5180] Raise error on invalid input shape in Map (Maximilian Linhoff)
- [#5176] Fix `observatory_earth_location` (Stefan Fröse)
- [#5169] Add boundary condition to create a PeriodicMapAxis (Atreyee Sinha)
- [#5161] Flux maps combination (Quentin Remy)
- [#5160] Fix select_nested_models if there is no free parameters for the null hypothesis (Quentin Remy)
- [#5156] Introduction of the structure function for variability studies (Claudio Galelli)
- [#5145] LightCurveTemplateTemporalModel method to generate a model from a periodogram by using the Timmer algorithm (Claudio Galelli)
- [#5135] Add different options to compute stat_array on FluxPointsDatasets (Quentin Remy)
- [#5129] Copy on and off phase intervals in `PhaseBackgroundMaker` (Maxime Regeard)
- [#5125] Fix implementation of the testing code for larger docstring examples (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#5118] css for sphinx v15 (Hanna Stapel)
- [#5115] Add 3 TS definitions to compute with TestStatisticNested class (Quentin Remy)
- [#5058] 3PC Fermi catalog (Maxime Regeard)
- [#5057] 2PC Fermi catalog (Maxime Regeard)
- [#4996] MAINT: use new location for dev wheels (Brigitta Sipőcz)
- [#4983] Adjust getting-started page (Kirsty Feijen)
- [#4433] Add a function to combine excess maps (Quentin Remy)


