.. include:: ../references.txt


.. _gammapy_2p0_release:

2.0 (August 26, 2025)
---------------------


- Released August 26, 2025
- 27 contributors (10 new contributors)
- 312 pull requests since v1.3, 497 pull requests since 1.0
- 118 closed issues

Summary
~~~~~~~


Gammapy v2.0 is a new Long Term Stable (LTS) release. It will be maintained for the next development cycle
(approximately two years), while support for Gammapy 1.x versions is now dropped.
With Gammapy 2.0, we provide analysis support for most major Imaging Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescopes including H.E.S.S.,
VERITAS, MAGIC, LST1, Water Cherenkov Telescopes like HAWC and SWGO, as well as Fermi-LAT.

Since Gammapy 1.3, improved support is provided for Fermi-LAT analysis, and analysis
of VERITAS telescope data has been validated.

Bayesian inference with nested sampling is now supported.
A ``Sampler`` class that wraps around sampler libraries is introduced. It provides
an interface similar to the Fit class. For now, the ``Sampler`` relies on the ``ultranest`` library.
A detailed tutorial is provided.

Flux sensitivity can now be computed by the various flux estimator classes such as `~gammapy.estimators.FluxPointsEstimator`,
with the ``"sensitivity"`` option. The calculation is based on the Asimov dataset following the method described in `~gammapy.estimators.ParameterSensitivityEstimator`.


There has been significant code cleanup and restructuring. They should not break user codes
but might marginally change analysis results. We mention here a number of changes and
undergoing re-structuring efforts:

- The computation of flux errors is no longer performed with regular error propagation.
  Because the latter is a linear approximation, it frequently leads to unexpected flux ranges
  when extrapolating over a wide range of energies. Butterfly plots computed this way can become
  incorrect far from the decorrelation energy. To overcome this, error bands are now computed using
  multi-normal sampling of spectral parameters taking into account all correlations. The `plot_error`
  method now builds an envelope of the sampled spectra using vectorized evaluation of the model.
- The separation of the internal DL3 data model from GADF specification is close to being over. In particular,
  the `~gammapy.data.EventList` internal table does no longer follow the GADF structure now.
- The restructuring of statistics and `Dataset` has started with the addition of ``FitStatistic`` classes
  and a registry to allow configuration of the statistic on a dataset.

Significant effort has been put in cleaning up the documentation and re-organising the tutorial structure.


API changes
~~~~~~~~~~~

Two API-breaking changes have been introduced in this version:

- `gammapy.data.EventList.select_parameter` now takes a ``values`` and ``is_range`` argument
  instead of ``band`` to allow exact matches
- ``cta_south`` and ``cta_north`` have been renamed as ``ctao_south`` and ``ctao_north``, respectively,
  in `~gammapy.data.observatory_locations`

Features deprecated since Gammapy v1.3 have been removed.



Documentation improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Documentation appearance has been updated using less custom css code, and now support a dark theme.
- The ordering of tutorials has been restructured for clarity.
- Four new tutorials have been added:

  - one exposing VERITAS analysis along with addition of VERITAS data in `$GAMMAPY_DATA` (:doc:`/tutorials/data/veritas`)
  - one exposing computation of upper limits for non-detected sources (:doc:`/tutorials/analysis-3d/non_detected_source`)
  - one explaining computation of upper limits on parameters (:doc:`/tutorials/details/parameter_ul`)
  - one introducing Bayesian inference with nested sampling (:doc:`/tutorials/details/nested_sampling_Crab`)

- The tutorial showing how to handle Fermi-LAT data (:doc:`/tutorials/data/fermi_lat`) has been rewritten to expose a full Fermi-LAT analysis.
- Code examples have been added in docstrings.


New features
~~~~~~~~~~~~


*gammapy.catalog*

- Add pulse profiles for Fermi `~gammapy.catalog.SourceCatalog3PC`

*gammapy.data*

- Helper method for observation selection at ``Datastore`` level, specially useful for WCD

*gammapy.datasets*

- Add a helper function to create a global dataset from a list of datasets

*gammapy.estimators*

- Add optional sensitivity computation on `~gammapy.estimators.TSMapEstimator`
  and `~gammapy.estimators.FluxPointsEstimator`

*gammapy.makers*

- Added spatial model to `gammapy.makers.FoVBackgroundMaker` init
- Add time integration of 3D background model aligned on Alt-Az during an observation in `~gammapy.maps.MapDatasetMaker`
- Add a `~gammapy.datasets.FermipyDatasetsReader` to convert Fermi-LAT maps from Fermipy
  into a gammapy `~gammapy.datasets.Datasets`.

*gammapy.modeling*

- Support for pixel-wise weighted likelihood as implemented in Fermi-LAT science tools
- Add `~gammapy.modeling.Sampler` class to support nested sampling for bayesian analysis
- Addition of a `~gammapy.modeling.models.LogUniformPrior`
- Implement a more robust error propagation method using parameter sampling
- Add ``datasets_names`` argument to `~gammapy.modeling.models.create_fermi_isotropic_diffuse_model`
- Add interp_scale to parameter scaling
- Make a distinction between `~gammapy.modeling.Parameters.free_parameters` and
  `~gammapy.modeling.Parameters.free_unique_parameters`

*gammapy.stats*

- Introduce optional numba optimized fit statistic functions. By default, Gammapy v2.0 still relies on Cython optimized code.

*gammapy.utils*

- Introduce a FoVFrame in `gammapy.utils.coordinates`
- Allow energy selection in `~gammapy.makers.utils.make_theta_squared_table`

Bug fixes and improvements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Improvement of the `gammapy.datasets.MapDataset.peek` function to show relevant info
- Fix memory leak related to lru_cache and caching coordinates in WcsGeom
- Fix `~gammapy.estimators.TSMapEstimator` pad_width
- Fix mask handling in `~gammapy.estimators.TSMapEstimator`
- Preserve parameters links in `gammapy.modeling.models.Models.copy()`
- Fix link label display in parameters.to_table
- Fix ``e_peak`` implementation of `~gammapy.modeling.models.SuperExpCutoffPowerLaw4FGLDR3SpectralModel` to give results compatible with Eq 21 of https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/1538-4357/acee67
- Fix of a `~gammapy.maps.HpxGeom` simulation error


Infrastructure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- Remove dependency on ``sphinx-astropy``
- Support of astropy v7.1
- Utilise OpenAstronomy in our release workflow to build wheels
- Added extra workflows for

  - Scheduling run for doctests in rst and examples
  - Scheduling link check (separated from CI)


Contributors
~~~~~~~~~~~~
- Fabio Acero
- Arnau Aguasca-Cabot
- Tora T H Arnesen
- Luis Barrios-Jiménez
- Anushka Bhatt
- Tomas Bylund
- Katharina Egg
- Gabriel Emery
- Kirsty Feijen
- Lucas Gréaux
- Bruno Khélifi
- Maximilian Linhoff
- Edgar Molina
- Daniel Morcuende
- Mireia Nievas-Rosillo
- Robert Daniel Parsons
- Natthan Pigoux
- Fabio Pintore
- Tobias Preis
- Maxime Regeard
- Quentin Remy
- Leander Schlegel
- Atreyee Sinha
- Hanna Stapel
- Mitsunari Takahashi
- Régis Terrier
- Samantha Wong
